---
title: A taxonomy of eavesdropping attacks
abbrev: MITM
updates: 4949
docname: draft-richardson-saag-onpath-attacker-04

stand_alone: true

ipr: trust200902
area: Security
wg: Security Area Working Group
kw: Internet-Draft
cat: info

pi:    # can use array (if all yes) or hash here
  toc: yes
  sortrefs:   # defaults to yes
  symrefs: yes

author:

- ins: M. Richardson
  name: Michael Richardson
  org: Sandelman Software Works
  email: mcr+ietf@sandelman.ca

- ins: J. Hoyland
  name: Jonathan Hoyland
  org: Cloudflare Ltd.
  email: jhoyland@cloudflare.com
normative:
  RFC4949:

informative:
  dolevyao:
    target: "https://www.cs.huji.ac.il/~dolev/pubs/dolev-yao-ieee-01056650.pdf"
    title: "On the Security of Public Key Protocols"
    org:
      ins: IEEE
    date: 1983

  quic:
    target: "https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/msg/saag/wTtDYlRAADMmgqd6Vhm8rFybr_g/"
    title: "QUIC terms for attacks"
    org:
      ins: IETF
    date: 2020

  malory:
    target: "https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/msg/saag/b26jvEz4NRHSm-Xva6Lv5-L8QIA/"
    title: "Man-in-the-Middle"
    org:
      ins: IETF
    date: 2020

  span:
    target: "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Port_mirroring"
    title: "Port Mirroring"
    org:
      ins: Wikipedia
    date: 2020

  fibertap:
    target: "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Room_641A"
    title: "Fiber Tap"
    org:
      ins: Wikipedia
    date: 2020


  alliteration:
    target: "https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/msg/saag/R0uevzT0Vz9uqqaxiu98GtK1rks/"
    title: "Council of Attackers"
    org:
      ins: IETF
    date: 2020

  alicebob:
    target: "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alice_and_Bob"
    title: "Alice and Bob"
    org:
      ins: Wikipedia
    date: 2020

  digisign:
    title: "A method for obtaining digital signatures and public-key cryptosystems"
    target: "https://doi.org/10.1145/359340.359342"
    author:
      -
        name: "R. L. Rivest"
        org: "MIT Lab. for Computer Science and Department of Mathematics, Cambridge, MA"
      -
        name: "A. Shamir"
        org: "MIT Lab. for Computer Science and Department of Mathematics, Cambridge, MA"
      -
        name: "L. Adleman"
        org: "MIT Lab. for Computer Science and Department of Mathematics, Cambridge, MA"
    org:
      ins: "Communications of the ACM"
    date: "February 1978"

contributor:
  - name: Eric Rescola
    email: ekr@rtfm.com
  - name: Lou Berger
    email: lberger@labn.net
  - name: Alan DeKok
    email: aland@deployingradius.com
  - name: Christian Huitema
    email: huitema@huitema.net


--- abstract

The terms on-path attacker and MITM Attack have been used in a variety of ways, sometimes interchangeably, and sometimes meaning different things.

Increasingly people have become uncomfortable with the gendered term "Man" in the middle and have sought alternatives.

This document offers an update on terminology for network attacks, retaining some acronyms terms while redefining the expansion, and clarifying the different kinds of attacks.
Consistent terminology is important in describing what kinds of attacks a particular protocol defends against, and which kinds the protocol does not.

--- middle

# Introduction

A number of terms have been used to describe attacks against networks.

In the [dolevyao] paper, the attacker is assumed to be able to:

* view messages as they are transmitted
* selectively delete messages
* selectively insert or modify messages

Some authors refer to such an attacker as an "on-path" attacker [reference], or a "Man-in-the-Middle" [reference].

Despite a broad consensus on what is meant by a MITM attack, there is less agreement on the how to describe its variants.
The term "passive attacker" has been used in many cases to describe situations where the attacker can only observe messages, but can not intercept, modify or delete any messages.

Another variant is the case where an eavesdropper is not on the network path between the actual correspondants, and thus cannot drop messages, they may be able to inject packets faster than the correspondants, and thus beat legitimate packets in a race.

As summarised, there are three broad  variations of the MITM attacker:

1. An on-path attacker that can view, delete and modify messages.  This is the Dolev-Yao attack.
2. An off-path attacker that can view messages and insert new messages.
3. An off-path attacker that can only view messages.

# Three kinds of attack

The attacks are numbered in this section as no consensus on naming the attacks yet.
In the diagrams below, the sender is named "Alice", and the recipient is named "Bob",
as is typical in many cryptographic protocols {{alicebob}}, as first introduced by {{digisign}}.

Alice and Bob were named as expansions of "A" and "B", which would otherwise be very abstract concepts of the two end points.

The attacker has historically been named "Mallory", but this document proposes that the expansion be named "Meddler"

~~~~ aasvg
{::include alicebob.txt}
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #alicebobdiag title="Alice communicating with Bob"}


## Active On-Path Attacker, or Meddler in the Middle (MITM)

In this attack, the attacker is involved with the forwarding of the packets.
A firewall or network router is ideally placed for this attack.

~~~~ aasvg
{::include firstkind.txt}
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #firstkind title="The first kind of attack"}

In this case the Meddler can:

* view all packets

* selectively forward or drop any packet

* modify any packets that is forwarded

* insert additional packets

## Passive On-Path attack

In this attack, the attacker is not involved with the forwarding of the packets.
The attacker receives a copy of packets that are sent along the path.
This could be from, for instance, a mirror port or SPAN {{span}}.
Alternatively, a copy of traffic may be obtained via passive (optical) tap {{fibertap}}.
This kind of attack is often associated with Pervasive Monitoring {{?RFC7258}}.

~~~~ aasvg
{::include secondkind.txt}
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #secondkind title="Passive On-Path attack"}

In this the meddler can:

* view all packets

Note that they have no way to inject new packets, and this attack may occur seconds to decades after the data was exchanged.

## Passive On-Path attack with bypass

In some cases, the Meddler is be able to send messages to Bob via another route.
Due to some other factor (such as shorter or higher cost routing), these messages arrive at Bob prior to the original message from Alice.

~~~~ aasvg
{::include secondkind-raced.txt}
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #racedkind title="Passive On-Path attack with bypass"}

In that the Meddler can:

* view all packets

* insert additional/copied packets into the stream

But the Meddler is unable to drop or modify the original packets.
Bob however, may be unable to distinguish packets from Alice vs packets sent from the Meddler that purport to be from Alice.

To be effective or useful, this type of attack needs to occur in real time.


## Passive Off-path attacker

The third kind of attack is one in which the Meddler can not see any packets from Alice.
This is usually what is meant by an "off-path" attack.
The meddler can forge packets purporting to be from Alice, but can never see Alice's actual packets.

~~~~ aasvg
{::include thirdkind.txt}
~~~~~~~~~~
{: #thirdkind title="Passive Off-path attacker"}

In this the Meddler can:

* insert additional packets

# Existing uses of the terms

## IETF QUIC terms

[quic] ended up the following taxonomy:

on-path:
: [Dolev-Yao] MITM, Active On-Path attacker

Limited on-path (cannot delete):
: Active Off-Path attacker

Off-path:
: Passive Off-Path attacker

# Security Considerations

This document introduces a set of terminology that will be used in many Security Considerations sections.

# IANA Considerations

This document makes no IANA requests.

# Acknowledgements

The SAAG mailing list.

# Changelog


--- back

# Monster in the Middle

As a special case for the MITM, if the Meddler steals cookies (whether they are HTTP Cookies, IKE nonces, or TCP SYN Cookies), then this kind of attack is a Monster in The Middle.
This is otherwise known as a: nom-nom-nom-nom attack.

~~~~ aasvg
              .---. .---.
             :     : o   :    me want cookie!
         _..-:   o :     :-.._    /
     .-''  '  `---' `---' "   ``-.
   .'   "   '  "  .    "  . '  "  `.
  :   '.---.,,.,...,.,.,.,..---.  ' ;
  `. " `.                     .' " .'
   `.  '`.                   .' ' .'
    `.    `-._           _.-' "  .'  .----.
      `. "    '"--...--"'  . ' .'  .'  o   `.
      .'`-._'    " .     " _.-'`. :       o  :
jgs .'      ```--.....--'''    ' `:_ o       :
  .'    "     '         "     "   ; `.;";";";'
 ;         '       "       '     . ; .' ; ; ;
;     '         '       '   "    .'      .-'
'  "     "   '      "           "    _.-'
~~~~
